
> 0.1 What Is This Book About?

This book is about the fundamentals of *data structures and algorithms* - the basic elements from which large and complex software projects are built. To develop a good understanding of a data structure requires *three things*:
1. First, you must learn how the information is arranged in the memory of the computer;
2. Second, you must become familiar with the algorithms for manipulating the information contained in the data structure;
3. And third, you must understand the performance characteristics of the data structure so that when called upon to select a suitable data structure for a particular application, you are able to make an appropriate decision.

The algorithms and data structures in this book are presented in the *Python programming language*. A unique feature or this book, when compared to the available book on the subject, is that it offers a balance of theory, *practical concepts*, *problem solving*, and *interview questions*.

```ad-tip
Concepts + Problems + Interview Questions
```

The book deals with some of the most important and challenging areas of programming and computer science in a highly readable manner. It covers both algorithmic theory and programming practice, demonstrating how theory is reflected in real Python programs. Well - known algorithms and data structures that are built into the Python language are explained, and the user is shown how to implement and evaluate others.

The  book offers a  large  number of *questions*,  with detailed  answers, so you  can  practice  and assess your knowledge before you take the exam or are interviewed.

### Salient features or the book are:

- Basic principles of algorithm design
- How to represent well-known data structures in Python
- How to implement well-known algorithms in Python
- How to transform new problems into well-known algorithmic problems with efficient solutions
- How to analyze algorithms and Python programs using both mathematical tools and basic experiments and benchmarks
- How to understand several classical algorithms and data structures in depth, and be able lo implement these efficiently in Python

Note that this book does not cover numerical or number- theoretical algorithms, parallel algorithms or multi-core 
programming.

