In the above-mentioned equation, the variables x and y can take any values such as integral numbers (10, 20), real numbers (0.23, 5.5), or just 0 and 1. To solve the equation, we need to relate them to the kind of values they can take, and data type is the name used in computer science programming for this purpose. A data type in  a programming language is  a  set of data with predefined values. Examples of data types are: integer , floating point, unit number, character , string, etc.

Computer memory is all filled with zeros and ones. If we have a problem and we want to code it, it's very difficult to provide the solution in terms of zeros and ones. To help users, programming languages and compilers provide us with data types. For example, integer takes 2 bytes (actual value depends on compiler), float takes 4 bytes, etc. This says that in memory we are combining 2 bytes (16 bits) and calling it an integer. Similarly, combining 4 bytes (32 bits) and colling it a float. A data type reduces the coding effort. At the top level, there are **two types of data types**:
1. System-defined data types (also called Primitive data types)
2. User-defined data types.

#### 1. System-defined data types (Primitive data types)

Data types that are defined by system are called primitive data types. The primitive data types provided by many programming languages are: int, float, char, double, bool, etc. The number of bits allocated for each primitive 
data type depends on the programming languages, the compiler and the operating system. For the same primitive data type, different languages may use different sizes. Depending on the size of the data types , the 
total available values (domain) will also change.

For example, "int" may take 2 bytes or 4 bytes. If it takes 2 bytes (16 bits ), then the total possible values are 
minus 32 ,768 to plus 32,767 $(- 2^{15} to 2^{15}- 1)$. If it takes 4 bytes (32 bits), then the possible values are between - 2,147,483,648 and +2.147,483,647 $(-2^{31} to 2^{31} - 1)$. The same is the case with other data types.

#### User defined data types:

If the system-defined data types are not enough, then most programming languages allow the users to define their own data types, called user-defined data types. Good examples of user defined data types are: **structures** in C/C + + and **classes** in Java.
For example, in the snippet below, we are combining many system-defined data types and calling the user defined data type by the name **"newType".** This gives more flexibility and comfort in dealing with computer memory.

```cpp
struct newType {
	int data 1; 
	float duta 2 ;
	...
	char data;
}
```

