# 1.1 Python Overview

- To accomplish any task by a computer we require communication with computer, by building data structures and algorithms we communicate detailed instructions to a computer.
- An excellent way to perform such communication is using high-level language, such as **Python**.
- The Python programming language was originally developed by **Guido van Rossum** in early **1990s**, and has since become a prominently used language in industry and education.
- The second major version of the language, **Python 2**, was released in  **2000**.
- The third major version, **Python 3**, released in **2008**.

## 1.1.1 The Python Interpreter

- Python is formally an ***interpreted*** language.
  - Commands are executed through a piece of software known as the **Python interpreter**
  - The interpreter receives a command, evaluate that command, and reports the result of the command.
  - While the interpreter can be used interactively (especially when debugging), a programmer typically defines a series of commands in advance and serves those commands in a plain text file known as ***source code*** or a ***script***. And source code is conventionally stored in a file named with `.py` suffix (example: `main.py`).
- On most operating systems, the Python interpreter can be started by typing python from the command line.
- By default, the interpreter starts in interactive made with a clean workspace.
- Commands from a predefined script saved in a file (example: `demo.py`) are executed by invoking the interpreter with the filename as an argument (example: `python demo.py`), or using an additional -i flag in order to execute a script and then enter interactive mode (example: `python -i demo.py`).
- Many **Integrated Development Environments** (IDEs) provide richer software development platforms for Python, including one named IDLE that is included with the standard Python distribution. **IDLE** provides an embedded text-editor with support for displaying and editing Python code, and a basic debugger, allowing step-by-step execution of a program while examining key variable values.

## 1.1.2 Preview of a Python Program

### 1. Comments

- Comments are annotations provided for human readers, yet ignored by Python interpreter.
- The primary syntax for comments in Python is based on use of the `#` character, which designates the remainder of the line as a comment.

### 2. Delimiter

- Delimiter is a sequence of one or more characters used to specify the boundary between separate.
- Individual statements are typically concluded with a newline character, although a command can extend to another line, either with a concluding backslash character (\\), or if an opening **delimiter** has not yet been closed, such as the `{` character in defining ***value_map***.
- Whitespace is also key in **delimiting** the bodies of control structures in Python.
- Specifically, a block of code is intended to designate it as the body of a control structure, and nested control structures use increasing amounts of **indentation**.

### 3. Indentation

- Python's syntax relies heavily on the use of white space.
- It refers to the spaces at the beginning of a code line.
- Python uses indentation(Tab) to indicate a block of code for every particular reserved words in Python.

#### Code Fragment 1.1: A Python program that computes a GPA

- let us take example of a Python program that computes the grade-point average (GPA) for a student based on letter grade that are entered by a user.

```py
# program that computes the grade-point average (GPA) for a student based on letter grade that are entered by a user.
print('Welcome to the GPA calculator.')
print('Please enter all your letter grades, one per line.')
print('Enter a blank line to designate the end.')
# map from letter grade to point value
points = {'A+':4.0, 'A':4.0, 'A-':3.67,
          'B+':3.33, 'B':3.0, 'B-':2.67,
          'C+':2.33, 'C':2.0, 'C-':1.67,
          'D+':1.33, 'D':1.0, 'F':0.0
         }
num_courses = 0
total_points = 0
done = False

while not done:
    grade = input()                 # read line from user
    if grade == '':                 # empty line was entered
        done = True
    elif grade not in points:       # unrecognized grade entered
        print("Unknown grade '{0}' being ignored".format(grade))
    else:
        num_courses += 1
        total_points += points[grade]
    if num_courses > 0:             # avoid division by zero
        print('Your GPA is {0: .3}'.format(total_points / num_courses))
```

**Input :** A+


**Output :**

```output
Welcome to the GPA calculator.
Please enter all your letter grade, one per line,
Enter a blank line to designate the end.
Your GPA is 4.0
```
